

Course outline:
❑E-payment System, Online Credit Card Transaction, 
❑Digital and Mobile Wallet, Smart Cards, Social/Mobile Peer-to-Peer Payment Systems, 
❑Digital Cash/e-cash, E-Checks, Virtual Currency, Electronic Billing Presentment and 
Payment (EBPP) System, 
❑SET Protocol, Features of SET, Participants in SET, Card Holder Registration, Merchant 
Registration, Purchase Request, Dual Signature, Payment Authorization, Payment Capture, 
❑Status of E-Payment Systems in Nepal, Case Studies of Global and Local Payment 
Systems
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
1
UNIT- 3 :  Electronic Payment System 

Electronic Payment System
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
2
Electronic Payment System allows people to make online payments for their purchases of goods 
and services without the physical transfer of cash and cheques, irrespective of time and location. 
The key components of this payment system are the payers and payees, financial institutions, 
electronic devices, communication networks, payment gateways, and mobile payment apps. 
As the global economy continues to evolve, the dependency on physical modes of payment is 
gradually giving way to digital alternatives that offer speed, convenience, and efficiency. 
These systems facilitate a diverse range of financial activities, from online purchases and bill 
payments to person-to-person transfers.
Electronic Payment System allows customers to pay for goods and services electronically without 
the use of cheques or cash.
Businesses need a strong and secure electronic payment system in online dealings.
Electronic Payment System is regulated in India by the RBI.
The system is safe, speedy, and cost-effective in comparison with paper-based payment systems.
The objectives of electronic payment system technology are to support the quick, efficient 
transfer of funds and enable users to make paperless payments.

Stakeholders in Payment Systems
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
3
Consumers are interested primarily in low-risk, low-cost, convenient, and 
reliable payment mechanism. Consumers have demonstrated that they will not 
use new payment mechanism unless they are equally or more
Merchants are interested primarily in low-risk, low-cost, secure and reliable 
payment mechanism. Merchants currently carry much of the risk of credit card 
fraud and much of the hardware cost of verifying payments. 
Financial intermediaries such as banks and credit card networks are primarily 
interested in secure payment systems that transfer risks and cost to consumers 
and merchant, while maximizing transaction fees payable to them. 
Government regulators are interested in maintaining trust in the financial 
systems. Regulators seek to protect against fraud and abuse in the use of 
payment systems, ensure that the interests of consumers and merchants are 
balanced against the interest of the financial intermediaries whom they regulate; 
and enforce information reporting laws.

Characteristics of Electronic Payment System:
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
4
Applicability: Applicability of payment system is the extent with which it is accepted as payment. Users 
should be able to pay for goods and services easily by using the system.
Easy to use: The system should not be complex. A user from the remote area should be able to use the 
system. 
Security: It means e-payment systems should be able to resist attacks. Creation, modification and over 
spending of the value (money) should be protected. 
 Reliability: It means system should run smoothly in all scenarios. It should be free from failures.
Trust: It is the degree of the confidence that the money and the personal information are safe. 
Scalability: System should be scalable by timely changes in the underlying infrastructure. 
Convertibility: It means funds represented in one mechanism should be easily convertible to funds in 
another mechanism. 
Interoperability: System should be operable in between multiple service providers. 
Efficiency: It means cost of the handling payment should be reasonable.
Anonymity: It is the feature related to privacy of user. System should be able to protect the identity of the 
user. 
Traceability: System should be able to link spending with the users even if the identity of the user is 
anonymous.
Authorization Type: It is considered good if a payment system is useful in both online and offline 
environment.

Advantages of Electronic Payment System
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
5
24/7 Accessibility:Electronic Payments can be made at any time, providing 
round-the-clock access to financial transactions.
Global Accessibility:Users can make payments and transfer funds globally 
without being restricted by geographical boundaries.
Instant Transactions: Electronic Payments are processed quickly, allowing for 
near-instantaneous transfer of funds between accounts.
Faster Settlement:Compared to traditional payment methods, electronic 
transactions often result in faster settlement times.
Record-Keeping and Tracking:Electronic Payment Systems facilitate easy 
record-keeping for both businesses and individuals.
Encryption and Authentication:Electronic Payment Systems employ robust 
encryption and authentication protocols to secure transactions and protect sensitive 
information.

Disadvantages of Electronic Payment System
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
6
Security Concerns:Electronic Payment Systems are susceptible to security 
breaches, including hacking, phishing, and identity theft.
Technical Issues: Electronic Payment Systems rely on technology, and technical 
glitches or system failures can disrupt transactions.
Fraud Risk:Despite security measures, Electronic Payment Systems are not 
immune to fraud. Unauthorized transactions, stolen credentials, or fraudulent 
activities can occur, leading to financial losses for individuals and businesses.
Privacy Concerns: Users may be concerned about the collection and storage of 
personal information by electronic payment providers.
Transaction Fees: Some electronic payment systems impose transaction fees, 
which can add up over time.

E-Payment  
Modes
Credit  
cards
DebitcardsSmartcard
Digital  
Cash
E-Wallet

E-Cash (Digital Cash)
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
8
Electronic cash is a new concept in online payment systems because it combines computerized 
convenience with security and privacy that improve on paper cash. 
   • Its versatility opens up a host of new market and application. 
   • E-cash is an electronic or digital form of value storage and value exchange that has limited 
convertibility into other forms of value. It requires intermediaries to convert.

DigitalCash
WhatisDigital Cash?
•DigitalCashactsmuchlikerealcash,exceptthatit’snotonpaper.
•Moneyinyourbankaccountisconvertedtoadigitalcode.
•Thisdigitalcodemaythenbestoredonamicrochip,apocketcard(likea
smartcard),orontheharddriveofyourcomputer.
•Theconceptofprivacyisthedrivingforcebehinddigitalcash.Theuserof
digitalcashisassuredananonymoustransactionbyanyvendorwho
acceptsit.
•Yourspecialbankaccountcodecanbeusedovertheinternetoratany
participatingmerchanttopurchaseanitem.
•Everybodyinvolvedinthetransaction,fromthebanktotheusertothe
vendor,agreetorecognizetheworthofthetransaction,andthuscreate
thisnewformorexchange.

HowdoesDigitalCashwork?
•Thisexampleshowshowdigitalcashmightworkthroughabankinginstitution.Thebankcreatesadigital
banknotebysigningamessagewhichspecifiestheserialnumber(withaprimaryorpublickey)andvalueof
thenote,andsendsittoPersonA.PersonA,ashewithdrawsit,usesChaum'stechnique(ACryptography
technique)toaltertheserialnumbersothatthebankwillnotrecognizethenoteasbeingfromthiswithdrawal.
Thisnoteisnowreturnedtothebankwiththenewserialnumber.Thebanknowhasanotewithanewserial
number.PersonAthenpaysPersonBelectronicallybysendingthebanknotetohim.PersonBchecksthe
note'svaliditybydecryptingusingthebank'spublickeytocheckitssignature(newserialnumbervalidity).
PersonBthensendsthenotetothebank,whichcheckstheserialnumbertoconfirmthatthisbanknotehasn't
beenspentbefore.TheserialnumberisnowdifferentfromthatinPersonA’swithdrawal,therebypre-venting
thebankfromlinkingthetwotransactions.Theenablingbankmerelychecksthenewserializedkeyaccount
fortheamountofthetransactionandtransfersthemoneybysendingoutadepositorynotice.PersonB
usingthesameencryptingtechniquereturnsthedepositorynoticewiththenewserializeaccount.Theenabling
bankdoesnotknowwhothemerchantisonlythatmoneyisavailableforpayment.Insomerespects,thisisa
debitcardtransactionwithnoinformationotherthantheamountofthetransaction.Allinitialdepositor
informationisintheprimarykeyaccountnotthepasswordaccount.
SpecialsoftwaretoenablethesedualtrackprocedureswasdevelopedbyDigicash.Howeverthisventurewas 
notsuccessful,norwasitsuccessfulforitssuccessorcorporation,CyberCash,Inc.

E-Cash (Digital Cash) Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
11
Advantages of E-Cash
Lower Transaction Cost
Convenient
Authorization not required
Suitable for small payments
Limitations of E-Cash
High financial risk as e-cash may be stolen by hackers
The vendors should have an account in the same bank which issued the e-cash
Electronic Cash Issues
E-cash must allow spending only once
- Must be anonymous, just like regular currency
- Safeguards must be in place to prevent counterfeiting
Must be independent and freely transferable regardless of nationality or storage mechanism
Divisibility and Convenience Complex transaction (checking with Bank)

e-Cheque
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
12
It's simply an electronic version of a paper check. An e-check uses the same legal and business 
protocols associated with traditional paper checks. 
   • Electronic cheque fulfills the needs of many business organizations, which are previously 
exchanging paper-based cheque based on the vendors, consumers and government. 
   • Working process of e-cheque is as same as that of the traditional cheque payment system. 
   • An account holder will issue the electronic cheque document which contains the information such as 
name of the account holder payee name, name of the financial institution; payer account number and 
the amount of payment on the cheque. 
   • Most of the information is in uncoded form. Like a paper cheque, e-cheques also bear the digital 
equivalent of signature, which is called digital signature. 
   • It is a new payment instrument that combines high-security, speed, convenience, and processing 
efficiencies for online transactions.

e-Cheque Format
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
13

e-Cheque Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
14
Advantages
•Pay Quickly and Control Your Cash Flow
•Save Money
•Save Time
•Pay More Safely and Securely
•Compatible With Your Current Accounting Software
Pay from Anywhere, Anytime. 
Faster Processing Fee and 
Labor Reduction Customer Payment Options.
Disadvantage
Fraud Potential.
Errors and Reduced Float.

CreditCards
Creditissmallplasticcardwithauniquenumberlinkedwithan
account.
Ithasmagneticstriporchipembeddedinitwhichisusedtoreadby
credit cardreader.
Partiesinvolvedin creditcardpayment:
•Acardholderobtainsacreditordebitcardfromanissuingbank,
usestheaccounttopayforgoodsorservices.
•Amerchantisanytypeofbusinessthatacceptscardpaymentsin
exchangeforgoodsorservices.
•Amerchantbankestablishesandmaintainsmerchantaccounts.
Merchantbanksallowmerchantstoacceptdepositsfromcredit
anddebitcardpayments.
•Paymentprocessorsarecompaniesthatprocesscreditanddebit
card
transactions.Paymentprocessorsconnectmerchants,merchantbanks,
cardnetworksandotherstomakecardpaymentspossible.
•Issuingbanksarethebanks,creditunionsandotherfinancial
institutionsthatissuedebitandcreditcardstocardholdersthrough
thecard
associations.
•Card  associationsincludeVisa,  Mastercard,Discover
andAmerican Express.Thecardassociationssetinterchangerates
andqualification
guidelines,andactasthearbiterbetweenissuingbanksand
acquiring banksamongothervitalfunctions.

Credit Card Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
16
A credit card is termed as payment card, representing the majority of online 
payments because people are familiar with them, and merchants avoid the expense 
of a paper invoicing system. 
In this card payments are simple anywhere and, in any currency, thus it matches 
the global reach of the internet. 
To avoid the complexity associated with token-based payment methods, 
consumers and vendors are also looking at credit card payment on the internet as 
one possible time-tested alternative. 
There is nothing new in the basic process. Without doubt, the basic means of 
payment used and initiated via the internet for consumer transactions till date is the 
credit card. 
If consumers want to purchase a product or service, they simply send their credit 
card details to the service pro

Credit Card Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
17
We can break credit cards payment on online networks into three basic categories:
Payments using Plain Credit Card Details: 
    o The easiest method of payment is the exchange of unencrypted credit cards over a public 
network such as telephone line or the internet. 
    o The low level of security inherent in the design of the internet makes this method problematic. 
    o Authentication is also a significant problem, and the vendor usually responsible to ensure that 
the person using the credit card is its owner. Without encryption, there is no way to do it.
 • Payments using Encrypted Credit Card Details: 
    o It would make sense to encrypt your credit card details before sending them out, but even then, 
there are certain factors to consider. 
    o One would be the cost of credit card transactions itself. Such cost would prohibit low value 
payments (micro-payments) by adding costs to the transactions. 
• Payments using Third Party Verification: 
    o One solution to security and verification problems is the introduction of a third party; a 
company that collects and approves payments from one client to another. 
   o After a certain period of time, one credit card transaction for the total accumulated amount is 
completed.

Credit Card Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
18
The participants involved in credit card payments include: 
  • Customer/Cardholder: The consumer doing the purchase, using a credit card 
that has been issued by its issuer. 
   • Issuer: The financial institution (i.e., bank) that issues the card to the 
cardholder. The issuer guarantees payment for authorized transactions.
   • Merchant: The merchant offers the goods and services, and has a financial 
relationship with the acquirer.
   • Acquirer: The financial institution of the merchant. The acquirer processes 
credit card authorizations and payments. 
   • Clearing House: The credit card processing centers (clearinghouse) are 
institution that handles verification of accounts and balances. 

Credit Card Payment Process
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
19
StepDescription
Step 1Bank issues and activates a credit card to the customer on his/her request.
Step 2The customer presents the credit card information to the merchant site or to the merchant from 
whom he/she wants to purchase a product/service.
Step 3Merchant validates the customer's identity by asking for approval from the card brand company.
Step 4Card brand company authenticates the credit card and pays the transaction by credit. Merchant 
keeps the sales slip.
Step 5Merchant submits the sales slip to acquirer banks and gets the service charges paid to him/her.
Step 6Acquirer bank requests the card brand company to clear the credit amount and gets the payment.
Step 7Now the card brand company asks to clear the amount from the issuer bank and the amount gets 
transferred to the card brand company.

Working Techniques of Credit Cards
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
20
Credit card payment processing for the e-commerce electronic payment system 
takes place in two phases:
authorization(getting approval for the transaction that is stored with the order) 
and
settlement(processing the sale which transfers the funds from the issuing bank to 
the merchant's account). 
The flow charts below represent the key steps in the process starting from what a 
customer sees when placing an order through completing the sale and finishing 
with the merchant processing the sale to collect funds.

Authorization Process of Credit Cards.
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
21

Settlement Process of Credit Cards
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
22

How Credit Card Works?
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
23
When a consumer wants to make a purchase, he or she adds the item to the merchant’s shopping 
cart. 
When the consumer wants to pay for item in the shopping cart, a secure tunnel through the 
Internet is created using SSL. Using encryption, SSL secures the session during which credit card 
information will be sent to the merchant and protects the information from the interlopers on the 
Internet. 
SSL does not authenticate either the merchant or the consumer. The transaction parties have to 
trust to one another. Once the consumer credit card information is received by the merchant, the 
merchant software contacts a clearinghouse. 
A clearing house verifies account balances. The clearing house contacts the issuing bank to verify 
the account information. 
 Once verified the issuing bank credits the account of the merchant at the merchant’s banks 
(usually occurs in a batch processes and it may happen in a few hours, or even in a few days).
Once the merchant has received the payment gateway's digital signature; he will ship the goods 
to the cardholder knowing that the customer transaction has been approved.

Advantages of Credit Card
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
24
The system is familiar to users and was widely used before the advent of e-commerce, thus maintaining 
the user's confidence. 
Transaction costs are hidden from users (i.e., basically met by sellers). 
Payment is simple anywhere and, in any currency, thus matching the global reach of the internet. 
The credit issuing company shares the transaction risk, helping overcome consumer's fear and 
reluctance to buy goods they have not actually seen, from sellers they do not know. 
Cash back: Many banks offer cash back opportunities if you use your card to pay monthly bills 
(electricity) or for grocery purchases. Besides, online shopping portals too have cash back offers on 
various products. 
Reward points: Credit card companies offer reward points for any purchases you make with your card. 
EMIs: If you are making a big purchase (TV, refrigerator, laptop), you can easily convert it to affordable 
monthly installments. Banks usually charge interest for conversion to EMIs. 
Grace period: You can defer your payments till your bill is due. Banks offer a maximum 50-day grace 
period for paying back your dues. 
Safety: Credit cards are safer than debit cards as in case of fraud you are not out of money immediately. 
Payment gateways like Visa, Mastercard also offer additional password protection while using the cards 
online.

Disadvantages of Credit Card Payment
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
25
•Relatively high transaction cost makes them impractical for small value 
payments. 
They cannot be used directly by individuals to make payments to other 
individuals. 
Protecting the security of transaction is vital, especially in the virtual world there 
is no payment guarantee to the merchant by a bank. 
 All of the people do not have access to credit cards, so it can’t be treated as a 
default payment processing method for all electronic transactions.

What Is a Debit Card?
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
26
A debit card is a payment card that deducts money directly from your checking account. Also 
called “check cards” or "bank cards," debit cards can be used to buy goods or services or to get 
cash from an ATM. 
Debit cards can help you reduce the need to carry cash, although using these cards can 
sometimes entail fees.1
Debit cards are payment cards that reduce the need to carry cash or physical checks to make 
purchases.You can use debit cards at ATMs to withdraw cash.
Debit card purchases may require a personal identification number (PIN), but some purchases 
can be made without one.
You may be charged an ATM transaction fee if you use your debit card to withdraw cash from an 
ATM that's not affiliated with your bank. Some debit cards offer rewards, similar to credit card 
rewards, such as 1% back on purchases.

DebitCard
Debitcardisalsolikecreditcard.Itisrequiredtohaveabankaccountbefore 
havingdebitcard.
HowtoUseaDebitCardOnline?
Ifyou'repayingforsomethingonline,youcanuseyourDebitCard.Hereisa
step-by-stepguidetohelpyoucompleteyourpaymentsonlineusingDebit 
Cards-
•Onceyouareatthepaymentcheckout,youneedtochoose“PayUsingDebit/
CreditCard.Onceyouselectontheoption,youneedtospecifythetypeofcard,
i.e.,DebitCardandwhetheritisaVisaorMastercard.
•Then,typethe16-digitDebitCardnumberwhichisonthefrontsideofyour
DebitCard.Youwillalsohavetoentertheexpirationdateofthecard.
•Onceyou’veenteredtheDebitCarddetails,youmaybeaskedforaCCD,
CVV,orsimilarsecuritycode.Inmostcases,itisathreeorfour-digitcodethat
helpsprovethatyouareauthorisedtousethecard.Thiscodeismostlyfoundon
thebackofthecards.
•Onceyouarethroughthepaymentportal,youwillbeaskedtoenteraunique
transactioncodeoranOTP(one-timepassword)thatissenttothemobilenumber
linkedtoyourDebitCards.Onceyouenterthenumber,yourtransactionis
verified,andyoureceiveanotification.
•TouseaDebitCardonline,youwillneedtoknowthecorrectbillingaddress
whichislinkedtothecardbeingused.

How a Debit Card Works
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
28
A debit card is a card linked to yourchecking account. It looks like a credit card, but it works 
differently. The amount of money you can spend on a debit card is determined by the amount of 
funds in your account, not by a credit limit such as credit cards carry. 
Your debit card may be connected electronically to your account, or it can be an offline 
card.Offline cardstake longer to process transactions.
Unlike with a credit card, you don't go into debt when you use a debit card because you are using 
it to access funds you already have. You don't have to make monthly minimum payments on a 
debit card because there is no debt to repay.2
You can use a debit card to get cash from anATM, or you can make purchases with it like you 
make purchases with credit cards. With debit cards, you may need to enter yourPIN (personal 
identification number), although many debit cards can be used to make purchases without a PIN.
Debit cards usually have daily purchase limits, meaning you can't spend more than a certain 
amount in one 24-hour period.3
Debit cards draw the funds immediately from the affiliated account. So, your spending is limited 
towhat’s availablein your checking account, and the exact amount of money you have to spend 
will fluctuate along with your account balance.

Pros of Debit Cards
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
29
Widely Accepted
Manage Spending
Can Be Replaced Easily
Offer Secure Payment
Give Access to Cash

Cons of Debit Cards
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
30
Hold Funds
Spending Limits
Offer Few, If Any, Rewards

Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT)
•Anelectronicfundstransfer(EFT)isanytransferbytwocorrespondingbanksorfinancialinstitutionsthatisstrictly
handledbycomputerizedsystems.Inotherwords,thisisabroadtermformoderntransactionmethods.Aslongasit
doesn’tinvolvedirecthumancontactandisfacilitatedthroughacomputer,thenit’sconsideredanEFT.
•Youcanthinkofitasanumbrellatermofsorts,soEFTscanbewiretransfers,directdebits,ACHpayments,andmore.EFTs
haveexplodedinpopularityfollowingtheinventionoftheinternet,eCommerce,anddigitalcash.Virtuallyallcomponentsofa
traditionaltransactionarebeingdigitized—invoices,receipts,payments,andEFTsystemsareanessentialcomponentofthis.
Sowhyacceptelectronicchecks,digitaldebittransactions,etc.ifcreditcardsaresopopularthesedays?
•Costandconvenience.
•EFTsaresignificantlycheaperthancreditcards—averagingataround1%infeesasopposedto3%orsoforcards.For
businessesofalltypesandsizes,thisoffersasignificantincentivetosupportandencouragecustomerstouseEFTmethods.
•Whilefeaturesandspecificschangepaymenttype topaymenttype,therearesomecommoncharacteristicsacrossallEFT
paymenttypes.
•Fundsaretypicallytransferredwith24-48hours. Feestypicallyhoveraround1%
•EFTsarepopularforrecurringdebitsandcredits.
•CustomersenjoyhavingthepaymentflexibilityEFTsoffer.

Automated Clearing House (ACH)
•WhatisACH?
•ACH,orautomatedclearing house,islikeacheckwithoutthepaper.
•ACHpaymentsareatypeofEFT.IfEFTstoodforelectriccars,thenACHwouldbeaTeslaorNissanLeaf.SoACH
canbeatypeofEFTbutEFTcan’tbeatypeofACH.
•It’sacomputer-basedclearingandsettlementfacilitythatexchangesfundsbetweentwodepositoryinstitutions.ACH
ismostcommonlyusedinrecurringinvoicing(monthlyauto-drafts)anddirectdepositprograms.ACHischeapto
sendmoneywithandrelativelyeasytosetup,makingitanattractiveoptionforbusinessesthatconductlarge,
recurringbills(thinkB2Borconsultingfees).
TypicalusesofACH
•Direct deposits: This is the most popular use of ACH payments. By paying employees with ACH employers 
drasticallyreducefeesandincreaseemployeesatisfactionandconvenience.
•Directdebitsand credits:There’swidespreaduseofACHpaymentsinsubscription/repeatbillingsituations.Think
automaticdraftsvia gyms,utilities,insurance,etc.If you workinany sortofSaaSor retainer-basedbusiness,you 
needtosupportACH.
•Taxes:ACHis the mostcommonformoftaxpayment.

Risks inE-Payment
•DisputedTransaction
•Lackofsecurityortrust
•LackofAccounttrail
•Lackofanonymity
•Impulsebuying
•Paymentconflicts
•Frauds-phishing,skimming,impersonating
•Costing
•Technologicalfailure

What are the Benefits of Electronic Payment for the 
Merchant?
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
34
•It saves time
•It's more efficient
•It takes cash out of the equation
•It's more secure
•It generates more revenue
•It's easier to administer
•There's a certainty of payment.

Smart Card
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
35
A smart card is a physical card that has anembeddedintegrated chip that acts as 
a security token. Smart cards are typically the same size as a driver's license or 
credit card and can be made out of metal or plastic.

SmartCard
SecureandreliableSmartCardhasplayedakeyroleinimprovingmultifaceteddigitalsecurity.A
smartcardiscapableofstoringandprocessingthedatasecurelyinanetworkofcomputers.The
scopeofsmartcardsisincreasingdaybydayindiverseapplicationslikebanking,telephone
services,andmedicalrecordssystemsetc.Smart-Cardisasecureportablestoragedevicewhichis
usedinvariousapplicationsrequiringcontrolledaccesstosensitiveinformation.Itisinthesizeof
acredit/debitcard,incorporatedwithoneormoreintegratedcircuitchips.
Itfunctionsasamicroprocessor,memoryandprovidesaninput-outputinterface.The
International
OrganizationforStandardization(ISO)specifiescertainvoluntaryinternationalstandardsinmany
scientificandtechnologicalfields.However,tilltodate,ISOhasnotdefinedanystandardsforthe
devicestermedas“SmartCards.”



•HowdoestheSmartCardWorks?
•Asmartcardisconnectedtothehostcomputerorcontrollerviaacardreaderwhich
getsinformationfromthesmartcardandaccordinglypassestheinformationtothe
hostcomputerorcontroller.
•Advantages ofSmartCard:
•Mightbepromptlyreconfigured
•Reusable
•Securetransactions
•Givesmoresecurity
•Moretoughanddependable
•Permitnumerousprovisionstobesaved
inonecard

Smart Card Based Payment Systems
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
39
Smart Cards are credit card sized plastic cards with the memory chips and in some 
cases, with microprocessors embedded in them so as to serve as storage devices for 
much greater information than credit cards with inbuilt transaction processing 
capability. 
   • A single smart card can be used for many different purposes. It is more durable and is 
less expensive than credit cards. 
   • The smart card technology is widely used in countries such as Japan, Germany, 
Singapore and France to pay for public phone calls, transportation and shopper loyalty 
programs. 
   • Consumers can load money into an account on the card by using an automatic teller 
machine (ATM) or by placing the card in a slot in a specially equipped computer. 
   • The embedded chip keeps track of how much money is added to and withdrawn from 
the account 
   • Smart cards are already quite popular for online sales in some international markets.

Smart Card applications 
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
40
▪Smart cards are used in many applications worldwide, including:
Secure identity applications - employee ID badges, citizen ID documents, 
electronic passports, driver’s licenses, online authentication devices
Healthcare applications - citizen health ID cards, physician ID cards, 
portable medical records cards
Payment applications - contact and contactless credit/debit cards, transit 
payment cards
Telecommunications applications - GSM Subscriber Identity Modules, pay 
telephone payment cards

Payment Gateway 
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
41
•A payment gateway is the service that processes electronic transactions such as 
credit card transaction. 
When customers buy something from online store, they enter their credit card 
numbers during the checkout process. E-commerce site sends that credit card 
information to payment gateway to authorize the transaction and process the 
payment. 
If the credit card information submitted to the payment gateway matches the 
information on file with the credit card company and the charge is approved, the 
payment gateway will then transfer the money from customer's credit card into 
merchant’s account.

Payment Gateway working mechanism
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
42
•A customer places order on website by pressing the "Submit Order” or 
equivalent button. 
•If the order is via a website, the customer's web browser encrypts the 
information to be sent between their browser and the merchant's web 
server. This is usually done via SSL (Secure Socket Layer) encryption. 
•The merchant then forwards the transaction details through to their 
payment gateway. 
•The payment gateway which receives the transaction information from the 
merchant forwards it to the merchant's acquiring bank. 
•The acquiring bank then forwards the transaction information to the 
issuing bank for authorization. 
• The card issuing bank receives the authorization request and sends a 
response back to the payment gateway with a response: approved or 
declined.

Payment Gateway Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
43

Digital Wallet
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
44
▪Consumers are becoming more enthusiastic about online shopping and they can do shopping 
repeatedly. 
 Entering detailed shipping and payment information each time they make online purchases may 
be boring for them. 
 To address these concerns, many electronic commerce sites include a feature that allows a 
customer to store name, address, and credit card information. 
 An electronic wallet (sometimes called an E-wallet/Digital Wallet), serving a function similar to 
a physical wallet, holds credit card numbers, electronic cash, owner identification, and owner 
contact information and provides that information at an electronic commerce site's checkout 
counter.
Electronic wallets give consumers the benefit of entering their information just once, instead of 
having to enter their information at every site with which they want to do business. 

Most important functions of a digital wallet
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
45
Authenticate the consumer through the use of digital certificates or other 
encryption methods. 
Store and transfer value 
Secure the payment process from the consumer to the merchant. Digital wallets 
would support payments using a regular credit card, digital cash, digital credit 
card or digital check. 

Digital Wallet Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
46
Electronic wallets fall into two categories based on where they are stored:
Server- side Electronic Wallet: 
   o A server-side electronic wallet stores a customer's information on a remote 
server belonging to a particular merchant or wallet publisher. 
   o The main weakness of server-side electronic wallets is that a security breach 
could reveal thousands of users’ personal information including credit card 
numbers. 
• Client-Side Wallet: 
   o A client-side electronic wallet stores a consumer's information on his or her 
own computer. 
    o Many of the early electronic wallets were client-side wallets that required 
users to download the wallet software.

12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
47

12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
48

Benefits of a Digital Wallet
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
49
•Convenience. One of the biggest reasons people use their digital wallet is 
for the convenience! 
•More Secure.
•Allows you to be More Organized
•Use Contactless Payment for a Faster Checkout.
•Get Rewarded for Purchases.

e-Sewa
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
50
e-Sewa is the first online payment gateway of Nepal. It is an associate 
service of F1Soft International launched on 21 January 2010. Its 
headquarters is located at Hattisar, Kathmandu, Nepal. 
E-Sewa is a digital wallet. It facilitates its users to pay and get paid online. 
“e” means electronic, Sewa means "Service”: Electronic Service
 Registration and Merchant payment is free of cost, can be accessed using 
mobile application or web browser.

E-Sewa Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
51
Services like funds transfer to banks may incur charges depending on the policies adopted by eSewa. 
To register with eSewa, customer needs: 
   o Citizenship card (scanned or photo copy) and 
   o Passport size photo (scanned copy or original) 
• eSewa is available in two modules: B2B and B2C. 
• Currently, it provides following online services: 
   o Sending and Receiving Money 
   o Online Shopping o Payment of Utility Bills 
   o Purchase of Air Tickets and Movie Tickets 
   o Purchase of Recharge Cards and Mobile Top Up 
   o Payment of School and College Bills 
   o Payment of Internet Service Bills
   o Subscription of Newspapers and Magazines 
   o Payment of Credit Card Bills 
   o Facility of all eSewa services through mobile phone (mSewa) 
   o Withdraw funds from local bank account
   o Upload funds to local bank 

e-Sewa Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
52
eSewa offers various ways to load/prefund your eSewa account: 
   o Internet Banking: You can transfer funds to your eSewa wallet using internet banking of bank 
that is partner with eSewa. For this, customer will need to have an Internet banking enabled 
account with one the partner banks. 
   o Mobile Banking: If you have mobile banking enabled account with one of the banks then you 
can prefund your eSewa account using mobile banking. 
  • For the customers who don't have account in the above banks or the customers without mobile 
banking & internet banking can load their eSewa account the process of counter deposit

What is Cryptocurrency?
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
53
Cryptocurrency, or Crypto, is a virtual form of currency that secures the financial assets 
through cryptography. 
It has become famous due to its decentralization feature. 
It doesn’t require a central bank or government for transactions. In a nutshell, 
cryptocurrency is a decentralized system of peer-to-peer transactions for more 
transparency and security. 
Cryptocurrencies are not physical; these are digital tokens stored on a blockchain or 
distributed ledger.
One of the amazing things about cryptocurrency is that It’s exchangeable. Its value 
remains that same when you buy or trade them. 
Furthermore, this blockchain process allows the fast transfer of money without 
collapsing at any point. 
As the word Crypto refers to the encryption algorithm, so it offers various security 
functions, such as hashing, public-private key pairs, and elliptical curve encryption.

How Does Cryptocurrency Work?
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
54
Blockchain technology is the secret sauce underlying cryptocurrency. 
It is a decentralized digital ledger for storing the public record of all transactions involving a specific cryptocurrency. 
Each transaction is linked to the previous one as a block, and in this way, it becomes a secure chain. 
Due to this well-organized distributed structure, cryptocurrencies are difficult to change or counterfeit.
Initiation:
The first step is the initiation of the cryptocurrency. Cryptocurrency transactions are initiated when a user sends or 
receives digital coins. Each transaction is encrypted and safe.
Broadcasting:
Once the transaction is initiated, it broadcast to a network of nodes. Nodes are computers that are part of the 
cryptocurrency network. The network ensures that the transaction is visible to all nodes in the network, maintaining the 
blockchain in this way.
Verification:
The nodes in the network ensure that the sender has sufficient funds to complete the transaction. This is done through 
complex cryptographic algorithms.
Validation:
After this, the transaction and other transactions are added in blockchain. This block is then added to the blockchain, a 
distributed ledger that records all transactions in a securely and transparently.
Update:
The blockchain is continuously updated as new blocks are added to it. This ensures that the transaction history is secure 
and cannot be changed. This initiation, broadcasting, verification, validation, and updating process makes cryptocurrency 
work effectively as a digital currency.

Types of Cryptocurrencies:
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
55
Various types of cryptocurrencies are available in the market, each with unique features.
Bitcoin
Bitcoin is the first and most popular cryptocurrency that is widely accepted by everyone. It is 
used as the medium of exchange for online transactions. It has limited supply and volatile price 
movement.
Ethereum
It has gained popularity due to its smart contract functionality and self-executing agreements. It 
facilitates decentralized applications.
Litecoin
This currency is called the silver to Bitcoin’s gold. It is the lighter version of cryptocurrency. 
Litecoin allows faster transactions with lower fees. It is also widely accepted by merchants for 
payments.
Ripple
Ripple is a digital payment protocol in banks and financial institutions use for cross-border 
transactions. This quality makes it a popular choice for international money transfers. Investors 
should carefully research and understand the different options.

Cryptocurrency Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
56
Benefits of Cryptocurrency:
Decentralization:
Cryptocurrency offers users with a lot of benefits. It is decentralized in nature and doesn’t have a 
controlling authority. The introduction of cryptocurrency has eliminated the need for intermediaries such as 
banks and government institutions.
Security:
Cryptocurrency transactions are secured by cryptography, making them highly secure and private. This 
reduces the risk of fraud, identity theft, and other forms of cyberattacks common with traditional payment 
methods.
Transparency:
All transactions made with cryptocurrency are recorded on a blockchain, which provides transparency and 
accountability. Anyone can trace and verify its transaction.
Fast and Low-Cost Transactions:
Cryptocurrency transactions are typically processed faster and at a lower cost, which is much better than 
traditional financial transactions. This is especially beneficial for cross-border payments, as transaction fees 
and processing times can be significantly reduced by using it.
Borderless:
Cryptocurrency can be transferred and used anywhere in the world. It doesn’t need to be subjected to 
exchange rates or other restrictions. It allows for faster and more efficient cross-border payments.

Cryptocurrency Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
57
Drawbacks of Cryptocurrency:
Volatility:
One of the biggest drawbacks of cryptocurrency is its extreme volatility. The value of digital currencies can 
fluctuate wildly in a short period, making them a risky investment for many. This volatility can lead to 
significant losses for investors unprepared for sudden price changes.
Regulation:
There is lack of regulation in cryptocurrencies. Their decentralized nature of digital currencies makes it 
difficult for governments to control or monitor transactions. It may become a threat to illegal activities.
Security Threats:
Cryptocurrency transactions are not completely secure and are susceptible to hacking and fraud. Many 
exchanges and wallets have been targeted by cybercriminals, resulting in the loss of millions of dollars 
worth of digital assets.
Limited Adoption:
Although these currencies are getting popularity but still they are not widely accepted. Due to this, 
transaction of the currencies has become tough for the users.
Environmental Impact:
Mining cryptocurrency requires a great amount of energy that may rise question about environmental 
impacts. The massive amount of electricity needed to power mining operations. It impacts the 
sustainability of the cryptocurrency.

Electronic Billing Presentment and Payment (EBPP) System 
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
58
What Is Electronic Bill Payment and Presentment?
Electronic bill payment and presentment (EBPP) is a process that companies use to 
collect payments electronically through systems like the Internet, direct-dial access, and 
Automated Teller Machines (ATMs). 
It has become a core component ofonline bankingat many financial institutions today. 
Other industries—including insurance providers, telecommunications companies, and 
utilities—depend on EBPP services as well.
Understanding EBPP
EBPPs come in two types: biller-direct and bank-aggregator. Biller-direct is electronic 
billing, which is offered by the company providing the good or service. 
The company gives customers the option to pay bills directly on their web site and 
might alert them when a payment is due via email. 
The customer then logs into the site via a secure connection, reviews the billing 
information, and enters payment amount.

Electronic Billing Presentment and Payment 
(EBPP) System Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
59
The bank-aggregator or bill-consolidator model allows customers to pay bills to many 
different companies through one portal. 
That is, the service collects different payments from customers and distributes each 
payment to the appropriate company. 
A bank, for instance, might offer online users the option to make many 
differentpaymentslike credit cards, utility bills, and insurance premiums. Standalone 
sites also exist that allow people to view and pay all of their bills. 
These are called consumer consolidator models.
Some newer EBPP products include features like secure email delivery, stored payment 
data, and autopay. 
For example, a healthcare insurance company looking to streamline its customer billing 
system may decide to switch to EBPP and allow customers to pay directly on their 
website or to havepremiumsautomatically deducted each month. 
Doing so saves customers the hassle of filing paperwork and can save the organization 
on document delivery and processing costs.

Online Banking facilities in Banks of Nepal:
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
60
What is Internet Banking/e-Banking/Online Banking/Virtual Banking? 
Internet banking/e-banking is an electronic payment system that enables 
customers of a bank or financial institution to conduct a range of financial 
transactions through the financial institution’s website. 
Using internet banking, we can obtain our account balances, a list of recent 
transactions, various utility bill payments, and funds transfers between accounts. 
We can access all these facilities from anywhere and anytime using mobile or 
computer. 
It’s less time consuming, and very safe and secure. 
Nowadays, mobile banking is also gaining popularity but it shouldn’t be 
mistaken with internet banking. 
In mobile banking, we use our smartphone’s application or internet but the two 
have significant differences. Both are the modes of e-Banking.

Online Banking facilities in Banks of Nepal:
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
61
E-banking services includes: - 
ATMs o Cash Withdrawal 
   o Balance Inquiry o Fund Transfer is not available.
 • PoS Terminals o Financial transactions are made via Cards. 
   o Cash is debited from the client’s account(s). 
   o Cash cannot be deposited. 
 • Tele-Banking
  o Account Status check 
   o Balance Inquiry
   o No fund transfer facility.
 • SMS-Banking (Mobile Banking) 
  o Similar to Tele-Banking except telephone 
  o Cell phone is required instead of telephone.
 • Online Banking / Internet Banking 
  o Viewing account balances, recent transactions 
  o Bank statements o Funds transfers between the customer’s linked accounts 
  o Paying third parties, including bill payments and third-party fund transfers 
 o Many more including non-transactional tasks and transact banking tasks

History of Online Banking in Nepal:
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
62
Establishment of first Joint Venture Bank, Nepal Arab Bank Limited (now 
NABIL Bank), in 1984 was the first step towards e-banking in Nepal. It 
introduced Credit Cards in Nepal in early 1990. 
Automated Teller Machine (ATM) was first introduced by another Joint Venture 
Bank, Himalayan Bank Ltd. in 1995. Himalayan Bank Limited was also the first 
bank to introduce Tele-Banking (Telephone Banking) in Nepal. 
Internet-Banking was first introduced by Kumari Bank Limited in 2002. 
Laxmi Bank Limited was the first bank to introduce SMS-Banking (or Mobile 
Banking) in Nepal in the year 2004.
The channels in e-Banking available in Nepal are Automated Teller Machines 
(ATM), Point of Sales (PoS), Telephone Banking (Tele Banking), Internet 
Banking, Mobile Banking (SMS Banking).

Services of Online Banking in Nepal
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
63
Some of the services accessible through Internet banking in Nepal are: 
Online tax payment 
Access the account to check balance, 
Online trading of shares, 
Online remittance of money, 
Electronic bill payment system, 
•Check the account statement online.
•Open a fixed deposit account.
•Pay utility bills such as water bill and electricity bill.
•Make merchant payments.
•Transfer funds.
•Order for a cheque book.
•Buy general insurance.
•Recharge prepaid mobile
Transfer of funds from one customer’s account to other, etc. 

Important Security Tips to Use Online Banking Safely:
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
64
Access your bank’s website/web portal/application only by typing the URL in the 
address bar of your browser 
Clicking on any links from email or SMS to access the bank’s site may lead to a breach 
of your personal information. 
No banks will send you an SMS/email or call you over the phone to provide your 
personal information or OTP. So, make sure to avoid such scams.
 To improve your security, update your operating system, mobile application, and use 
the latest version of your browser. 
Also, make sure to scan your computer regularly with antivirus and ensure that the 
firewall is enabled. 
If possible, change your Internet Banking password at a regular interval. 
Monitor your transactions and activity log. 
Avoid accessing your online banking services from shared PCs, cyber cafes, or 
untrusted devices.

What is HTTPS?
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
65
Hypertext transfer protocol secure (HTTPS) is the secure version ofHTTP, 
which is the primary protocol used to send data between a web browser and a 
website. 
HTTPS is encrypted in order to increase security of data transfer. 
This is particularly important when users transmit sensitive data, such as by 
logging into a bank account, email service, or health insurance provider.
Any website, especially those that require login credentials, should use HTTPS. 
In modern web browsers such as Chrome, websites that do not use HTTPS are 
marked differently than those that are. 
Look for a padlock in the URL bar to signify the webpage is secure. 
Web browsers take HTTPS seriously;Google Chrome and other browsers flag 
all non-HTTPS websites as not secure.

How does HTTPS work?
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
66
HTTPS uses anencryptionprotocol to encrypt communications. The protocol is 
calledTransport Layer Security (TLS), although formerly it was known 
asSecure Sockets Layer (SSL). This protocol secures communications by using 
what’s known as anasymmetric public key infrastructure. 
This type of security system uses two different keys to encrypt communications 
between two parties:
The private key - this key is controlled by the owner of a website and it’s kept, 
as the reader may have speculated, private. This key lives on a web server and is 
used to decrypt information encrypted by the public key.
The public key - this key is available to everyone who wants to interact with the 
server in a way that’s secure. Information that’s encrypted by the public key can 
only be decrypted by the private key.

Secure Socket Layer (SSL)
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
67
Secure Socket Layer (SSL)provides security to the data that is 
transferred between web browser and server.
 SSL encrypts the link between a web server and a browser which ensures 
that all data passed between them remain private and free from attack.
Secure sockets layer (SSL) is a networking protocol designed for securing 
connections between web clients and web servers over an insecure 
network, such as the internet.

Why is SSL Important?
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
68
Originally, data on the web was transmitted in plaintext, making it easy for 
anyone who intercepted the message to read it. 
For example, if someone logged into their email account, their username and 
password would travel across the Internet unprotected.
SSL was created to solve this problem and protect user privacy. 
By encrypting data between a user and a web server, SSL ensures that anyone 
who intercepts the data sees only a scrambled mess of characters. 
This keeps the user’s login credentials safe, visible only to the email service.
Additionally, SSL helps prevent cyber attacks by:
Authenticating Web Servers: Ensuring that users are connecting to the 
legitimate website, not a fake one set up by attackers.
Preventing Data Tampering: Acting like a tamper-proof seal, SSL ensures that 
the data sent and received hasn’t been altered during transit

How does SSL work?
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
69
Encryption: SSL encrypts data transmitted over the web, ensuring privacy. If 
someone intercepts the data, they will see only a jumble of characters that is 
nearly impossible to decode.
Authentication: SSL starts an authentication process called a handshake 
between two devices to confirm their identities, making sure both parties are 
who they claim to be.
Data Integrity: SSLdigitally signsdata to ensure it hasn’t been tampered with, 
verifying that the data received is exactly what was sent by the sender.

What Is SSL and How Does It Work?
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
70
Secure Sockets Layer(SSL) is a security protocol that creates an encrypted connection 
between a web server and a browser. 
It provides a secure connection and prevents third parties from accessing or modifying 
information transferred.
To get an SSL certificate, website owners must buy it from aCertificate 
Authority(CA). 
The CA will use the CSR orCertificate Signing Requestto create the certificate.
The CSR is an encrypted text generated on the server where the certificate will be 
installed. It includes information such as the website’s domain name, contact details, 
and the public key to encrypt the data sent.
When the visitor’s browser tries to access the website, the web server will send a copy 
of the certificate for verification.
If the process is successful, an SSL-secured connection will be established. The website 
will use an URL that starts with HTTPS and, depending on the browser, a padlock icon 
will be displayed in the address bar.

12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
71

Why Do I Need an SSL Certificate?
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
72
Improve Security
There are many ways tomake your site secure. Adding an SSL certificate provides an extra and crucial layer of protection against malicious attacks.
Even if the website doesn’t accept transactions, you still need to protect users’ login details, addresses, and other personal information.
Websites without SSL certificates use HTTP, a text-based protocol, meaning it’s easier to intercept and read its traffic. HTTPS uses cryptographic 
keys to encrypt data, providing more complex security and making it difficult for potential attackers to intercept the data exchange.
Thus, the HTTPS protocol protects your website against digital threats such as man-in-the-middle (MITM) attacks. These attacks take place when 
someone intercepts the traffic between the website’s server or the client’s browser.
Attackers may either steal information exchanged or redirect traffic to a phishing website, where they ask for login credentials or other sensitive data.
Even if an attacker intercepts your connection, having an SSL certificate ensures that they cannot decrypt the information passed.
Establish Trust
Establishing trust with your customers is essential. Particularly in the case of online businesses, your customers need concrete proof that it’s safe to 
provide their data. Research shows that17% of shoppers abandon their cartsbecause they don’t trust the website enoughto enter their credit card 
details.
An SSL certificate communicates to visitors that they can safely exchange information with the website, encouraging them to use your service and 
keeping you ahead of competitors who don’t have one.
Furthermore, it helps visitors verify ownership of the website before signing in or providing other sensitive information.
Strengthen SEO
Another advantage ofinstalling an SSL certificateis boosting yourSEOstrategy.Googleand other search engineshave made website security an 
important factor when determining page rankings.
Since they aim to provide users with a safe web browsing experience,GoogleChromeand other web browsers display a“Not Secure” warning 
messageon all non-SSL websites to alert visitors.
Having an SSL certificate gives you an advantage over competitors who do not have one, improving your site’s position on search engine results 
pages (SERPs).

Salient Features of Secure Socket Layer
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
73
The advantage of this approach is that the service can be tailored to the 
specific needs of the given application.
Secure Socket Layer was originated by Netscape.
SSL is designed to make use of TCP to provide reliable end-to-end secure 
service.
This is a two-layered protocol.

SSL Certificate
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
74
SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) certificate is a digital certificate used to secure and verify the identity of a website or an 
online service. 
The certificate is issued by a trusted third-party called a Certificate Authority (CA), who verifies the identity of the 
website or service before issuing the certificate.
The SSL certificate has several important characteristics that make it a reliable solution for securing online transactions:
Encryption: The SSL certificate uses encryption algorithms to secure the communication between the website or service 
and its users. This ensures that the sensitive information, such as login credentials and credit card information, is 
protected from being intercepted and read by unauthorized parties.
Authentication: The SSL certificate verifies the identity of the website or service, ensuring that users are 
communicating with the intended party and not with an impostor. This provides assurance to users that their information 
is being transmitted to a trusted entity.
Integrity: The SSL certificate uses message authentication codes (MACs) to detect any tampering with the data during 
transmission. This ensures that the data being transmitted is not modified in any way, preserving its integrity.
Non-repudiation: SSL certificates provide non-repudiation of data, meaning that the recipient of the data cannot deny 
having received it. This is important in situations where the authenticity of the information needs to be established, such 
as in e-commerce transactions.
Public-key cryptography:SSL certificates use public-key cryptography for secure key exchange between the client and 
server. This allows the client and server to securely exchange encryption keys, ensuring that the encrypted information 
can only be decrypted by the intended recipient.
Session management: SSL certificates allow for the management of secure sessions, allowing for the resumption of 
secure sessions after interruption. This helps to reduce the overhead of establishing a new secure connection each time a 
user accesses a website or service.
Certificates issued by trusted CAs: SSL certificates are issued by trusted CAs, who are responsible for verifying the 
identity of the website or service before issuing the certificate. This provides a high level of trust and assurance to users 
that the website or service they are communicating with is authentic and trustworthy.

Advantages of SSL
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
75
 Security
Authentication
Reliability
Prevent Phishing
Online Payments
Software Requirements
SEO

Transport Layer Securities (TLS)
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
76
Transport Layer Securities (TLS) are designed to provide security at the transport layer. TLS was 
derived from a security protocol calledSecure Socket Layer (SSL). 
TLS ensures that no third party may eavesdrop or tampers with any message.
There are several benefits of TLS:
Encryption:
TLS/SSL can help to secure transmitted data using encryption.
Interoperability:
TLS/SSL works with most web browsers, including Microsoft Internet Explorer and on most 
operating systems and web servers.
Algorithm flexibility:
TLS/SSL provides operations for authentication mechanism, encryption algorithms and hashing 
algorithm that are used during the secure session.
Ease of Deployment:
Many applications TLS/SSL temporarily on a windows server 2003 operating systems.
Ease of Use:
Because we implement TLS/SSL beneath the application layer, most of its operations are 
completely invisible to client.

Working of TLS
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
77
▪The client connect to server (usingTCP), the client will be something. The client sends number 
of specification:
Version of SSL/TLS.
which cipher suites, compression method it wants to use.
The server checks what the highest SSL/TLS version is that is supported by them both, picks a 
cipher suite from one of the clients option (if it supports one) and optionally picks a compression 
method. 
After this the basic setup is done, the server provides its certificate. 
This certificate must be trusted either by the client itself or a party that the client trusts. 
Having verified the certificate and being certain this server really is who he claims to be (and not 
a man in the middle), a key is exchanged. 
This can be a public key, “PreMasterSecret” or simply nothing depending upon cipher suite.
Both the server and client can now compute the key for symmetric encryption. 
The handshake is finished and the two hosts can communicate securely. 
To close a connection by finishing. TCP connection both sides will know the connection was 
improperly terminated. The connection cannot be compromised by this through, merely 
interrupted.

TLS Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
78
Transport Layer Security (TLS) continues to play a critical role in securing data transmission over networks, especially on the 
internet. Let’s delve deeper into its workings and significance:
Enhanced Security Features:
TLS employs a variety of cryptographic algorithms to provide a secure communication channel. This includes symmetric 
encryption algorithms like AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) and asymmetric algorithms like RSA and Diffie-Hellman key 
exchange. Additionally, TLS supports various hash functions for message integrity, such as SHA-256, ensuring that data remains 
confidential and unaltered during transit.
Certificate-Based Authentication:
One of the key components of TLS is its certificate-based authentication mechanism. When a client connects to a server, the 
server presents its digital certificate, which includes its public key and other identifying information. The client verifies the 
authenticity of the certificate using trusted root certificates stored locally or provided by a trusted authority, thereby establishing 
the server’s identity.
Forward Secrecy:
TLS supports forward secrecy, a crucial security feature that ensures that even if an attacker compromises the server’s private key 
in the future, they cannot decrypt past communications. This is achieved by generating ephemeral session keys for each session, 
which are not stored and thus cannot be compromised retroactively.
TLS Handshake Protocol:
The TLS handshake protocol is a crucial phase in establishing a secure connection between the client and the server. It involves 
multiple steps, including negotiating the TLS version, cipher suite, and exchanging cryptographic parameters. The handshake 
concludes with the exchange of key material used to derive session keys for encrypting and decrypting data.

TLS Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
79
Perfect Forward Secrecy (PFS):
Perfect Forward Secrecy is an advanced feature supported by TLS that ensures the confidentiality of 
past sessions even if the long-term secret keys are compromised. With PFS, each session key is 
derived independently, providing an additional layer of security against potential key compromise.
TLS Deployment Best Practices:
To ensure the effectiveness of TLS, it’s essential to follow best practices in its deployment. This 
includes regularly updating TLS configurations to support the latest cryptographic standards and 
protocols, disabling deprecated algorithms and cipher suites, and keeping certificates up-to-date with 
strong key lengths.
Continual Evolution:
TLS standards continue to evolve to address emerging security threats and vulnerabilities. Ongoing 
efforts by standards bodies, such as the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), ensure that TLS 
remains robust and resilient against evolving attack vectors.
Conclusion:
In an increasingly interconnected world where data privacy and security are paramount, Transport 
Layer Security (TLS) serves as a foundational technology for securing communication over networks. 
By providing encryption, authentication, and integrity protection, TLS enables secure data 
transmission, safeguarding sensitive information from unauthorized access and tampering. As cyber 
threats evolve, TLS will continue to evolve, adapting to new challenges and reinforcing the security 
posture of digital communications.

Secure Electronic Transaction (SET)
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
80
Secure Electronic Transaction (SET) isa system and electronic protocol to ensure the integrity 
and security of transactions conducted over the internet. 
E-commerce websites implemented this early protocol to secure electronic payments made via 
debit and credit cards. 
Secure Electronic Transactionor SET is a security protocol designed to ensure the security and 
integrity of electronic transactions conducted using credit cards. Unlike a payment system, SET 
operates as a security protocol applied to those payments. 
It uses different encryption and hashing techniques to secure payments over the internet done 
through credit cards. 
The SET protocol was supported in development by major organizations like Visa, Mastercard, 
and Microsoft which provided its Secure Transaction Technology (STT), and Netscape which 
provided the technology of Secure Socket Layer (SSL).
SET protocol restricts the revealing of credit card details to merchants thus keeping hackers and 
thieves at bay. 
The SET protocol includes Certification Authorities for making use of standard Digital 
Certificates like X.509 Certificate.
Before discussing SET further, let’s see a general scenario of electronic transactions, which 
includes client, payment gateway, client financial institution, merchant, and merchant financial 
institution.

Secure Electronic Transaction (SET) Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
81

Secure Electronic Transaction (SET) Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
82
Requirements in SET:The SET protocol has some requirements to meet, some 
of the important requirements are:
It has to provide mutual authentication i.e., customer (or cardholder) 
authentication by confirming if the customer is an intended user or not, and 
merchant authentication.
It has to keep the PI (Payment Information) and OI (Order Information) 
confidential by appropriate encryptions.
It has to be resistive against message modifications i.e., no changes should be 
allowed in the content being transmitted.
SET also needs to provide interoperability and make use of the best security 
mechanisms.

Secure Electronic Transaction (SET) Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
83
Participants in SET:In the general scenario of online transactions, SET 
includes similar participants:
Cardholder –customer
Issuer –customer financial institution
Merchant
Acquirer –Merchant financial
Certificate authority –Authority that follows certain standards and issues 
certificates(like X.509V3) to all other participants.

Secure Electronic Transaction (SET) Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
84
SET functionalities:
Provide Authentication
Merchant Authentication– To prevent theft, SET allows customers to check 
previous relationships between merchants and financial institutions. Standard 
X.509V3 certificates are used for this verification.
Customer / Cardholder Authentication– SET checks if the use of a credit card is 
done by an authorized user or not using X.509V3 certificates.
Provide Message Confidentiality: Confidentiality refers to preventing 
unintended people from reading the message being transferred. SET implements 
confidentiality by using encryption techniques. Traditionally DES is used for 
encryption purposes.
Provide Message Integrity: SET doesn’t allow message modification with the 
help of signatures. Messages are protected against unauthorized modification 
using RSA digital signatures with SHA-1 and some using HMAC with SHA-1,

Secure Electronic Transmission (SET) Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
85
▪The Secure Electronic Transmission (SET) protocol imitates the current structure of 
the credit card processing system. 
▪Secure Electronic Transaction is a communications protocol standard for securing 
credit card transactions over networks, specifically, the Internet.
▪The most important property of SET is that the credit card number is not open to the 
seller. 
▪On the other hand, the SET protocol, despite strong support from Visa and 
MasterCard, has not appeared as a leading standard.
▪The two major reasons for lack of widespread acceptance are followings:
                (1) The complexity of SET
                (2) The need for the added security that SET provides.
▪Though, this might change in the future as encryption technology becomes more 
commonly utilized in the e-business world.

Security architecture of Secure Electronic Transaction
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
86
The SET architecture (designed to support PKI) comprises:
Digital certificates
Digital signatures authenticate the merchant's and customer's identities to mitigate the 
risk of a malicious third party manipulating transaction information. The Certificate 
Authority (CA) issues digital certificates to the issuing bank. The card issuer and 
acquirer, which may be a bank or other financial institution, both play an important role 
in issuing digital certificates.
Dual signatures
In the SET scheme, the customer's order information and payment information are 
encrypted with separate public keys. The order information is encrypted with the 
merchant's public keys, and the payment information is encrypted with the acquiring 
bank's public keys.
This system ensures that the encrypted PI can only be decrypted by the acquiring bank, 
and the encrypted OI can only be decrypted by the merchant.

Secure Electronic Transmission (SET) Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
87

Secure Electronic Transmission (SET) Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
88

Secure Electronic Transaction participants
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
89
A number of participants are involved in the SET process:
Cardholder/customer: The authorized holder of the payment card (Visa or 
Mastercard)
E-commerce merchant: The seller
Card issuer: A financial organization (e.g., bank) that issues the payment card
Acquirer: A financial organization that processes payment authorization and 
facilitates electronic funds transfer to the merchant's account
Payment gateway: Interface between card payment networks and secure electronic 
transactions
Certificate Authority: Trusted organization that provides public key digital 
certificates

SET Cont..
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
90
▪Advantages of SET: 
Information security
Credit card security
Flexibility in shopping
▪Disadvantages of SET: Some of the disadvantages of SET include its 
complexity and high cost for implementation.
    

Status of E-Payment Systems in Nepal,
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
91
What are the challenges of e-payment system in Nepal?
Nepal's payment service providers are grappling with a shortage of 
adequate policies, insufficient physical infrastructure, subpar corporate 
governance, and a lack of proper strategy for sustained business operations 
during times of crisis, a report by the central bank says
What are the different electronic payment systems in Nepal?
There are several digital payment providers in Nepal likeFone Pay, 
eSewa, Khalti, Prabhu Pay, and IME Pay, SmartQR, which enabled a wide 
range of services like mobile banking, digital wallet, and UPI-based 
transactions. Also, Banks and Financial Institution have their own digital 
payment platform.

Advantages of Online Payments
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
92
1. Speed of transactions
2. Convenience
3. Reaching global audience
4. Low transaction costs
5. Quick and easy setup
6. Variety of payment choices
7. Availability of more distribution channels
8. Easy management
9. Better customer experience
10. Recurring payment capabilities

Disadvantages of Online Payments
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
93
1. Technical problems
2. Password threats
3. Cost of fraud
4. Security Concerns
5. Technological illiteracy
6. Limitations on amount and time
7.Service fees and other additional costs
8. Disputed transactions
9. Loss of smart cards
10. False identity

Why is digital payment system important in Nepal?
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
94
The use of mobile wallets and digital payment systems for remittance 
transactions is having a positive impact on the economy of Nepal.
 This is becauseremittances can help to boost economic growth, reduce 
poverty, and improve financial inclusion.

Case Studies of Global and Local Payment Systems
12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
95
Global Payments is staying competitive in the rapidly changing 
technology solutions industry by driving innovation and collaboration 
with Google Workspace apps and tools such as Google App Maker.

12/11/2024
UNIT-3  Electronic Payment System           Prepared By: G.R
96
 
                  